I'm Simran Sethi, and this is
Ethical Markets the financial
lifestyle program reporting on
the people and institutions
redefining success in the
global marketplace.
"We are what we eat."  And this
week we'll look at how
individuals and enterprises
from all over
the world are transforming the
way we grow and consume foods
through organic, sustainable,
delicious and profitable
methods.
* Frightening stories keep *
emerging in the media
about the safety of the food we
eat whether it's mad cows,
mercury in fish, or dioxins in
breast milk the
industrialization
of our food supplies, use
of persistent pesticides,
and disconnect between what we
eat and how our food is raised
has led
to the explosive growth
of clean,
non-genetically-modified foods,
organics,
and sustainable agriculture.
For example, sales
of organic food increased by
over ten percent in the U.K.
in 2004 and in America the
organic market is projected to
reach thirty-point-seven
billion dollars by 2007.
Rodale Press and Institute have
lead the way for decades.
Anthony Rodale, Chairman
of the Rodale Institute
Our intention today here at the
Rodale Institute is
to have more farmers transition
into organic farming
to meet the demand.
We're committed to helping
to train and educate farmers
to make the transition to a
much more environmentally
friendly, regenerative way
of farming.
In establishing the scientific
understanding
for organic farming,
there was a realization that,
Wow, the soil is actually
improving while we are using
organic methods and techniques.
Simran Sethi
There are
currently a little over twelve
thousand organic farmers
in the United States which
represents
about point-five percent of the
domestic farming population.
This percentage can't keep up
with the demand
for organic food, so much of
the organics that are consumed
come from abroad.   And this
sets up an interesting dilemma
people want to eat well,
but also want to support local
farmers and reduce the amount
of fossil fuel it takes
for food to get from the farm
to their forks.
Anthony Rodale, Chairman
of the Rodale Institute Food,
when it's harvested, it begins
to change.  The life is cut
once the food is harvested
from the ground.   The
nutrients change as well.  And
if we eat foods that are grown
locally the food hasn't
traveled a long distance.
The local and regional
agriculture and food system
provides an incredible security
for that region as well. So
it's something that people can
feel good about.
Gary Hirshberg, President &
CEO, Stonyfield Farm
If we all
could purchase everything
within fifteen miles,
or even a hundred miles,
and it was organic,
meaning produced
in a manner that's consistent
with natural principles, then
of course we should do that.
Unfortunately, 85%
of humanity is urban,
and most people can't do that.
So, it's important to us
at this stage in societal
evolution that we get organic
foods out there.  Ultimately as
fossil fuels costs go up, as
transportation  miles become
really expensive, as we start,
like Europe has for decades,
recognizing the true costs
of transportation, I think
agriculture will become more
and more local or bioregional.
Anthony Rodale, Chairman
of the Rodale Institute
There's a lot of opportunities
for agribusinesses
to get involved, um,
but it's really important
to understand that, you know,
organic farming was not created
just to become a niche industry.
It was really created
to change all of agriculture
in this country and
around the world.
And I think that organic
farming standards can really
bring much more transparency to
the agricultural industry as a
whole.
Thomas Fricke, Co-Founder,
Forestrade, Inc.
We have to be certified
organic, that means we're
required really to work
at the grass roots and
from the ground up.
So we work actually with, now,
over 8,000 individual farmers
in hundreds of locations
around the world.
Organics for us,
it is a whole systems approach,
it really allows us to make a
connection as a consumer. It
enables us to really make a
personal relationship and
to really have an impact on
protecting and preserving the
way of life
of the producers and also,
helping to protect some very
important natural eco-systems,
so we really need to be
attentive and really very much
engaged with local cultural
practices, mores, and
values.
Anthony Rodale, Chairman
of the Rodale Institute
Many people believe that organic
farming cannot get the
appropriate yields.
Well, we found through one
of the worst droughts ever on
our farm that the organic
yields were superior
to the conventional yields.
And, also, too, this year we
realized being a very wet year
that the organic crop actually
outperformed the conventional
crop.
In general, an average year, we
see that the crop yields are
pretty much the same.
Supermarkets have only been
in existence for 40 years.
Before that, people got most of
their food locally and
regionally. They lived
within seasons and cycles.
Today, you can get foods
at anytime of the year because
people are demanding it.   The
importance of the local and the
regional movement that is
happening today is people
wanting to reconnect. The story
of someone buying a great
cheese that's grown locally
that has a story behind the
farm provides an incredible
educational awareness.
People love to talk
about food, and it provides
another great way
to connect other people to
foods that are grown locally
originally.
Simran Sethi
Witnessing the
exponential growth
of the natural food industry,
agribusiness has also entered
the arena, creating its own
healthy products and buying up
smaller organic and clean-food
companies.
Seeds of Change is now owned
by M & M Mars, Ben and Jerry's
is owned by Unilever, Boca
Foods is owned by Altria and
Horizon Organics and Silk Soy
Milk are owned by Dean
Foods.
Gary Hirshberg explains how the
sale of Stonyfield Farm
to consumer products giant
Danone has impacted his
business.
Gary Hirshberg, President &
CEO, Stonyfield Farm
One of my
proudest achievements
in 22 years of running this
company has been the marriage
with Group Danone, and I use
the word "marriage"
intentionally.  This has most
definitely not been an
acquisition.  We have an
independent Board of
Directors, I still have a
majority of board seats, even
though I'm only now a twenty
percent owner.
But truly, in three years,
Danone has proven that they are
much more sitting
in the bleachers cheering us
on than anything else.   They
put no money
into the company, the money
that they used...that they
spent, was
to take our investors out,
and they got an excellent
return on investment. Now where
I spend the bulk
of my time is working
on a number of organic
initiatives globally. I,
Danone is a global company.
I really do believe that we are
one of those little spores
inside Danone that will really
greatly change the way that
they do business.   I believed
deeply from the
beginning that
Stoneyfield
by ourselves was not going
to save the planet. That what
we needed to do was
to serve as a model,
that we can show large
companies,
established companies the way.
Frankly, McDonalds,
Coca-Cola, General Mills,
Danone can do more good
with one purchase order than I
may do in a lifetime.  And
indeed, if any one of those
companies made a real
aggressive commitment
to organic,
it would change the world.
Now, Stoneyfield is changing
the world also, just on a much
slower scale. I really believe
it's our moral obligation and
mandate to change these
companies. And
it's a great opportunity
for these companies, and
Danone has really recognized
that, and that's why they left
us so independent.
Simran Sethi
The nutritional
food company Clif Bar has
sustained and succeeded
without corporate backing.
The company's Luna Nutrition
Bar For Women has outsold
Nestlé's power-bars to become
the best-selling energy and
nutrition bars
in grocery stores,
which supports founder Gary
Erickson's commitment
to private ownership.
Gary Erickson, Founder, Clif
Bar
I got Clif Bar started
because I was a consumer
of a product that wasn't
working for me.
I was bicycle racing,
and doing tours in the Alps,
and one day I was
on a long bike ride,
and I took on this ride, 6
of the only energy bar
on the market in 1990, and
after about 125 miles
on this ride, I had eaten 5
of the 6 bars, and I had 50
miles to go on this ride,
and I needed fuel, I needed
to eat something, but I looked
at this last one,
and I just couldn't do it,
so that was
for me that was both a moment
of inspiration and an epiphany,
that I could make something
better than this, and I did.
The business grew from a 700
thousand dollar business in
1992 to 40 million dollars
by the year 1999,
in annual sales
without any investors.
So privately held, 2 partners
50/50.
Our two largest competitors,
Power Bar and Balance Bar were
purchased by the two largest
food companies in the world
Nestle and Kraft.
So now we're this small
Berkley, hippie-company sort
of competing against the two
largest food companies
in the world.
The experts from the outside
world were telling us, You're
never going to be able
to compete,
I mean you did a great job,
you're an entrepreneur,
you built your company,
but it is time you think
about exiting or bringing
on some investors.
So in an uncharacteristic
moment for myself,
because I am willing to take
on risk, I fell into the trap
of believing that we couldn't
make it,
and the company was put up
for sale.
Here's a guy who used to live
in a garage,
down the street here in
Berkley
with no heat and no bathroom,
making 10 thousand dollars a
year.
And now I have a chance
to walk away with 60 million
dollars.
In my heart, at the last
minute, literally 2 hours
before walking away
with the money, I took a walk
down around the block here and
half way
around the block I decided not
to do it.
I feel the only way to make
sure that this vision stays
alive and is sustained is
to remain privately held, and
in our case, we believe that
having 100% ownership makes it
even that much easier.
Simran Sethi
Clif bars are
never made with genetically
modified ingredients.
Genetically modified organisms
or GMOs have been heralded as
the answer
to poverty and malnutrition
by industrial food companies.
However, fears over the health
and environmental risks
associated with these
genetically modified foods have
escalated the public debate.
Large-scale food manufacturers
GMO, organic or otherwise -
have not only impacted
small-scale providers in the
United States,
but have deeply affected
farmers
in developing nations such as
Thailand where agriculture
remains the primary source
of livelihood.
Nicola Bullard, Focus
on the Global South
The important thing to
know about
Thailand is that more than 60%
of the people are engaged
in agricultural production.
In the past 20 or 25 years
there has been a real
transformation
in the agricultural sector.
It's become very oriented
towards exporting food,
rather than growing food
for local production.  What
this has meant is that
agribusiness, and large scale
agriculture production has
become the norm.   Now of
course the local farmers are
really suffering the
consequences of this, in many
respects because they are
losing a lot of autonomy.
They're being pushed
into producing food
for exports.   They have very
little control
over the market,
they have no say
over the price
of what they grow.  Obviously
if the price of rice,
or the price of soybean,
or the price of onions falls,
then the farmer still has the
same cost for putting
in the fertilizers,
the labor they put in, the
seeds, and so
on and so forth.   Many
of them are much more
in debt now than they were even
20 years ago.  In the 60's 20%
of rural households had debt
and now 80%
of rural households have debt.
So the farmers have really
tried to organize themselves,
to find solutions
to this problem, to find ways
to feed their families,
to get good prices
for their food
to resist the imposition
of certain kinds of seeds,
certain kinds of pesticides and
fertilizers and so on.
Simran Sethi
Activist and
scientist Vandana Shiva has
also helped inspire farmers and
consumers to action and is
shaping public policy and
corporate procedure
in the process.
Vandana Shiva, Founder,
Navdanya
The vicious cycle
of industrialized,
globalized agriculture is based
on three very,
very big myths. First that
industrial agriculture with
chemicals and genetically
engineered seed produces more
food.
It does not. I spent 15 years
of my scientific life working
on ecosystems and farming
systems that are biodiverse,
organic,
ecological and they have tens
to 100s
of times more productivity
without using any external
resources. The second big myth
is that globalized agriculture
is based on competition. No,
it's based on five giant
agri-business corporations
controlling input, distribution
and the consumer price. The
third very big myth is it's
based on self-generating
surpluses.
Even the United States is not a
food surplus country. It is
importing more food than it's
exporting. What the system has
done is created what we call a
great food swap.
Everyone is exporting and
everyone is importing. Only the
trading agribusiness are making
a buck
in exporting and importing.
Their profits shoot up. But
meantime the small farmer
disappears. Consumer health is
destroyed with one third of
America suffering
from the obesity epidemic.
Nicola Bullard, Focus on the
Global South In Thailand you
really have fantastic movements
of farmers organized in
alternative production systems,
creating local markets,
re-capturing a lot
of the old technologies,
the diversity
in the seed production,
in the kinds
of rice that they grow.   And
they're really trying
to carve out, if you like,
not a direct challenge
to the agribusiness,
but they're trying
to find a way
for them not only to survive
but to prosper.
Vandana Shiva, Founder,
Navdanya
I think every one
of us has an obligation
to be a co-producer
of a sustainable healthy, just,
peaceful economy of food.
The small farmer still accounts
for the largest number
of producers. But every one
of us,
even those who don't live on
the land are co-producer
because the moment we make a
choice about what food we eat
we are choosing the production
system we support.
In the very act of eating we
are shaping the economy.
decide whether the small farmer
will survive or agribusiness
will have more profits.
Thomas Fricke, Co-Founder,
Forestrade, Inc.
We're really creating a new
model, which is,
that doesn't fit into the neat
boxes such as a broker, or a
trader, or importer.  We are
really catalysts for what I
call multi-stakeholder
partnerships - farmers,
entrepreneurs, co-operatives,
warehouses, and a number,
a number of companies in both
U.S. and Europe that are our
partners, that are helping
to really get the story out,
that are really helping
to build the market.
Anthony Rodale, Chairman
of the Rodale Institute The
more that people get
into growing food organically
to meet the incredible demand
prices will start
to come down.
How do we get healthier,
fresher foods
into the urban areas, into the
rural areas where people's
diets aren't always the best?
And it is
by farmer's markets, by getting
your local supermarket
to have local foods, and also
to the direct connection
with the farmer
to the local consumer.
There's an abundant, diverse
ways where we can show these
examples of success around the
country and internationally.
* Simran Sethi
In North America *
the largest organic farming
co-operative is Organic
Valley.
The company is the only organic
brand solely owned and operated
by organic farmers.
And today we're joined
by its CEO, George Siemon and
Hewson Baltzell, our
stakeholder analyst and the
Co-Founder of Innovest
Strategic Value Advisors.
I wonder if you could start
off just telling us
about co-operative structure?
What exactly does that mean?
George Siemon
Well, a co-op is
much like any corporation
except that it's built on
serving its owners rather than
serving them
through building valuation.
Hewson Baltzell
George, how
does the actual governance
structure work in the co-op?
George Siemon
Well, of course,
we're like any
business where we have a
corporate board, and that kind
of thing,
which is all farmers.
But besides that we,
of course, our co-op has milk
and eggs and juice and a wide
variety of products and food
products and so each of those
groups has there own governance
board and so they all sit
down and talk about all the
issues that affect them whether
it be quality standards or
organic standards or supply
management or their contracts,
their agreements, their pay
price,
so it really gives them a place
to really engage
in the business
on a monthly basis.
And then we go through a lot,
we send out very good minutes
that describe the processes
because we believe the educated
farmer is the one that best
will make it to the future.
Hewson Baltzell
You have
something called the We The
Farmers Pledge, so what exactly
is that?
George Siemon
We have different
standards that we have come up
with, we have a pledge, we have
a membership agreement and we
have an affidavit process.
We make sure farmers that
really understand they're
really signing up for more than
just a marketplace they're
joining something.
As well we make them invest in
our co-op and that really is a
sign of commitment.
Simran Sethi
George, what do
you do to ensure that the
farmers are adhering
to the organic standards?
George Siemon
The most
important thing, I think, is
just the peer pressure they get
from their own farmers, you
know, so
by having the regional reps
in every region there's a lot
of contact.
If there are issues,
we've got a person near
by that can check into it.
Of course, rumors is a great
integrity check.
Hewson Baltzell
You also have
some programs that help
stabilize income, that is
to say that
in the market the price
of milk moves up and down and
that can be destabilizing
for the family farm.
Can you talk about that?
George Siemon
Sure, one
of our biggest goals when we
set out was to try to make
farmers have a sustainable
living, have a stable income so
they can plan their life.
And, so, one of our greatest
accomplishments has been just
that and it's part of the whole
organic dairy industry rewards,
and so farmers can literally
plan on what they're going
to get paid this year
for their business purposes.
Sure, there might be a little
variation here or there
but not anything noticeable.
Simran Sethi
And your regional
distribution system allows
people to purchase their goods
locally, right?
So the farmers the organic
family products that they're
purchasing are actually created
by farmers that are
in the region.
George Siemon
People want
to reward farmers
for doing something right.
And that's so unique and
farmers are eager to be part
of that so one of the things
our farmers really want
to do is
to have local production.
So, if we're in the New
England area, we have,
our milk is labeled New
England Pastures.
So farmers can take pride
in having their milk
at the local store.
We get them involved in the
marketing; we have them go
to demos or speak at trade
shows or anything we can do
to get them
out there and really put
on their local face.
The natural infrastructure we
have enables us to work with
all the bigger chains and all
the regulations and all that
but then by having the regional
pools and the regional
governance we're able also to
address the needs that people
have in their region and make
that connection between the
consumers and the farmers right
there.
Simran Sethi
What is your
relationship with chains?
Would Organic Valley products
be available in a place like
WalMart?
George Siemon
We focus
on the natural food trade.
That's our natural home, you
know, but we certainly sell
to the bigger chains as well.
Hewson Baltzell
What about
actual certification? I know
there are debates
about how rigorous organic is.
Does that affect your business
and do you have an opinion
about that regulation?
George Siemon
Well, certification, I think,
is a very valid system.
We're now part of the USDA
which has given us some merit
and recognition as a mature
industry.
Of course, it's brought its own
headaches, too, to work
within the government.
But I feel the certification
system works.
Hewson Baltzell
What about
the premium that you have
to pay for, let's say,
a gallon of milk that's organic
versus the commercial brand?
How do you justify that
to consumers?
George Siemon
Well, there's
three issues, basically.
One, there's additional costs
if you buy feed, for example,
or whatever, your organic
feed's quite expensive and
quite in short supply,
so there are additional costs.
Two, unfortunately,
we're trying to overcome what
might be called a bankrupt food
system of farmers going out
of business every day.
So we're trying
to get those people up
to a sustainable living.
And three,
we're still inefficient.
People are charging higher
margins,
we've got more hauling miles,
we've got more line losswe're
still at this stage.
I mean, we're quite proud,
we're 3% of the organic milk
mar - of the milk market now -
is organic milk and that's a
huge accomplishment compared
to where we were 10 years ago,
but still we are suffering from
&ome inefficiencies we hope
and higher margins along the
way that we hope might
decrease over time.
Simran Sethi
Well, I want
to thank both of you
for joining us today.
Now a commentary from Hazel
Henderson futurist, author
of Building a Win-Win World and
the creator of this series.
Hazel Henderson
Today, industrially-processed
food -
whether canned, dried, frozen
or preserved is losing favor
among upscale consumers.
Even cooking food reduces its
nutritional value somewhat.
So salad bars and raw natural
organically grown foods are
featured in many trendy
restaurants.
All this means that such foods
must be meticulously grown and
cleaned.
Many still need pasteurizing,
including milk and fruit
juices.
Upscale, health-conscious
consumers are also looking for
produce and foods
uncontaminated with pesticides
and toxics,
like mercury,
which concentrates
in the food chain.
Britain's National Consumer
Counsel offers a
Health-Responsibility Index
rating supermarkets
to protect children from junk
foods and growing childhood
obesity.
Many parents have succeeded
in ridding schools of junk
foods and sugar filled soft
drink vending machines.
Today, as you learned
on this show, organically grown
produce cannot keep up
with consumer demand, growing
at 20% per year!
The U.S. still has
to import organics.
The irony is that just as
people know their health
benefits, they must battle
to get clear labels
on other foods to know whether
they contain
genetically-modified organisms
GMOs.
European consumers, unlike
Americans, have so far been
vigilant about GMO labeling.
Laws there prevent sale
of GMO-containing foods.
Now, large GMO producers are
also buying up seed companies.
In today's globalized economy,
all these changes
in our food supply affect
people in perverse and very
different ways.
The patenting of native plants
has provoked many national
movements to protect them.
In the USA, Europe and Japan,
contract agriculture is
growing. Consumers form groups
and contract
with local farmers to grow
customized organic crops.
Markets for clean food are
growing
at 16% annually versus 4%
for supermarket chains.
Luckily, healthy alternatives
are now widely available
in health food stores,
supermarkets, restaurants, your
local farmers market and ask
for them in supermarkets,
too.
Bon appetit!
I'm Hazel Henderson.
Find me at our website
by clicking on
Calvert-Henderson Quality Of
Life Indicators.
And that will conclude this
edition of Ethical Markets.
For more information
on clean food, log on
to www.ethicalmarkets.com.
Thanks for watching.
Keep being the change you wish
to see in the world,
and we'll see you soon.
Coming up on future episodes:
socially responsible investing
and healthy living.